
Preventing/Mitigating NIS Network Attacks with IPSec
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The passwd.adjunct mechanism described here creates a 'sealed-system'
for NIS security only so long as the network infrastructure and
participating hosts can be trusted - For example, host-IP spoofing
or physical manipulation of servers and their installed system could
result in a compromised machine participating in the NIS network,
which in turn implies a potential leak of associated hashed password
data which could then be used as input data to a dictionary attack
or other means to expand access within the system.

In order to mitigate against this weakness, IP Security can be
deployed amongst the participating hosts in the network to ensure
that only properly authorized physical hosts are able to participate
in the NIS network. If a simple 'system integrity' is required,
using IPSec in a Ike-PSK/AH/Transport mode in order to protect the
hosts against host based should be sufficient in most cases to
prevent compromise of the key data by unknown hosts Per this scheme,
it is assumed that the network core can be trusted, but that the
endpoints could be manipulated. A more robust methodology would
utilize an ESP security mode, potentially with better keying
methodologies, and would be required to protect password hash data
if the network core could not be trusted.

It should be noted that the system as configured still distributes
ipsec key data to the participating hosts, and that this key data
can be retrieved in plaintext via software - therefore, a physically
or software-compromised host in the network still could access the
secured NIS server and associated password data via the usual NIS
query methods after joining or using the existing access via ipsec.

However, as noted, using IPSec and a separated shadow password
method should provide a sealed system whereby system compromise can
be contained and mitigiated to the level of the given NIS domain -
after compromise is detected, contained and attack vectors are
determined and properly mitigated, a forced password change and
update of affected IPSec keys should be sufficient to restore the
system to a self-contained, sealed level.

